Proverbs 13:5
A righteous man hates lying, but a wicked man is loathsome and comes to
shame. This verse tells about the righteous and the wicked in relation to verbal honesty. The righteous hates lying. He is averse to dishonesty. He is transparent and speaks the truth. The book of proverbs is about polarities in life, men and values. The author speaks of God and man, the righteous (upright, just, good, blames) and the wicked (forward, sinner, unjust, evil and perverse); the wise (prudent) and the foolish (simple, lacking in knowledge wisdom or understanding); the diligent and the lazy sluggard) slothful; the humble (lowly, meek) the humble and the proud (haughty, arrogant); the rich and poor; the son and the servant; the king (ruler, prince) and the people; the generous and the miser (stingy), hoarder); truth and falsehood (lying, lies, false witness); justice and oppression; virtuous Woman, and strange woman.

The book of proverbs deals largely with identity, ways and results: who you are is underscored by what you think, say or do; and determines your results. Who you are is a product of the way you follow and who you are determines where, when and how you arrive.

In the verse under consideration, we see that the righteous man hates lying. The wicked man, on the other hand, is loathsome (repulsive to the righteous) because of falsehood and ends up in shame. What happens to the wicked is the opposite of what the righteous gets. Whereas the wicked comes to shame, the righteous comes to honour.

THE KEY TO TRANSFORMATION IN LIFE
WHO I AM______ My Way - thoughts words action ______ Results What am I supposed to change to experience transformation in life? Who I am and the choices I make (of thoughts, words and actions) reinforce each other. You are who you are because of what you do. You do. A good tree produces a good fruits similarly, you do what you do because of who you are By their fruits you shall know them. Trying to change who you are or your experiences is an endless struggle. It is changing your choices that transforms who you are and your experiences consider your ways (Haggai 1:5).

RIGHTEOUSNESS GUARDS; WICKEDNESS OVERTHROWS
Proverbs 13:6
Righteousness guards him whose is blameless; But wickedness overthrows the sinner.

Many people shun righteousness because they do not know the value of righteousness. Righteousness guards protects the one whose way is blames. To be guarded by righteousness is the greatest privilege available to men. Righteousness delivers from death. Death is the greatest human disaster; and righteousness handles death. Righteousness is more powerful than death. It takes the stronger to deliver from the hand, of the stronger. If righteousness delivers from death, it means that the one guarded by righteousness cannot be touched by death. No medicine, nutritional invention, man or amount of money has power over death; only righteousness. Righteousness is an everlasting foundation.

HIM WHOSE WAY IS BLAMELESS
As for the Lord, His way is perfect (psalm 18:30). The only perfect way is the Lords way. He said, Your ways are not my ways (Isaiah 55:8) if His ways are not our ways, and His ways are perfect, then our ways cannot be blameless. The only blameless way is His way. The one that follows His way is the one that justifies or declares your way blameless. Every mans way is pure in his eyes; but the Lord Judges the heart.

THE BLAMELESS WAY
1. The way is a person! Jesus said, 1 am the way it is in Him that we are made acceptable (Ephesians 16). To be in Christ is to be in the blames way. That is why he says, Abide in me:
2. The way is the Word: Gods word gives us principles to guide us. When you are following Gods word, you are in the blames way.
3. The way of the spirit: The Holy Spirit is our Guide from God. He shows us the specific ways to follow in life. The Holy Spirit always confirms the prescription of Gods word and glorifies Jesus Christ. The Holy Spirit leads in the blameless way. You cannot follow The Holy Spirit and go wrong; if you are in Christ, obeying Gods word and following The Holy spirit; you have maximum protection. Nothing and no one can harm you.

It is for fear of safety that men turn from righteousness. They think righteousness would be able to help them in the hour of need or trouble. But when men forsake righteousness, they also forsake their protection and their provision follow the perfect way and leave the details of your hand in the hands of righteousness the righteousness the that dwells in you and overshadows you. Those who forsake righteousness to seek refuge in sin would be overthrown by wickedness in them and the one outside them. The fear of the wicked comes upon them! Those who run from righteousness, seek to be overthrown.

Proverbs 13:9
The light of the righteousness rejoices; but the lamps of the wicked will be
put out.
Light is for direction and guidance. Everyone begins with enough light to brighten his way. You need light to find your way in a dark world or a world dominated by darkness. It is what you are or the way you choose to follow in life that determines what happen to your light.
IT IS NOT THE AVAILABILITY OR UNAVAILABILITY OF LIGHT THAT DETERMINES WHAT WE BECOME. IT IS WHO WE ARE (RIGHTEOUS OR WICKED) THAT DETERMINES WHAT HAPPENS TO OUR LIGHT. THE LIGHT OF THE RIGHTEOUS

It is important to note that both the righteous and the wicked have light. The light of the righteous rejoices. NIV says, it shines brightly. This means that life goes upwards and gets better for the righteous. His understanding improves with time. Unless if the righteous is blind there is no reason he would miss his way in life. He is assured of constant supply of light. The light of the righteous comes from God via the word, the Holy Sprit and the human spirit.

THE LAMP OF THE WICKED
The lamp of the wicked will be put out. That is what a man gets for wickedness. He will be left to grope in the in the dark an stumble through life. The sources of his light (his lamp) would be put out. The lamp of the wicked is not in his hands. God controls it; and the wicked has no promise of light. The lamp (light bearer) of the wicked is not of God that that is why it can be put off. The lamp of the wicked is man-made; self made!

WHY DO THE RIGHTEOUS STUMBLE OR FALL
Suffering does not mean absence of light. For the righteous, Gods light shines brightly even in suffering. Suffering does not mean stumbling or falling although it may give occasion for that.

WHY DO THE RIGHTEOUS SUFFER?
1. Attack from wickedness; many are the affliction of the righteous Job is an example. Joseph, David, Jesus.
2. Process/training: journey through the wilderness was a process ordained by God for Israel (Isaiah 50:10-11)
3. Sin: when the righteous turns away from light, he stumbles.
4. Blindness or Ignorance: my people perish for lack of knowledge.
5. Association genesis 18-19 captivity (Hosea 4:6) Cut the root of pride. Blame pride for quarrels

THE KEY TO POVERTY AND SHAME
Proverbs 13:18
Poverty and shame will come to him who disdains corrections: but he who regards a rebuke will be honoured.

It is not failure that brings problems to men but refusal to learn from failure or mistakes. Corrections are provided to help those who fail, to redirect them and give them another opportunity to succeed. Corrections are like reverse gears. They help you to turn back and make a new correct move. People always get the opposite of whatever they say No to. Those who disdain correction disdain riches and honour. So, they inadvertently invite poverty and shame. Every one holds the key to his own destiny. God has destined every one to greatness but man choose where they want to go by their decisions. It is what each man mixes with what life presents that determines what he or she gets. OPPORTUNITY + YOUR INITIAL RESPONSE + FALURE +PRIDE CORRECTION = POVERTY AND SHAME

All who end up in poverty and reproach are people who refused correction. You can predict your tomorrow by your decisions and actions today. You will always end up with the opposite of what you walk away from. It is pride that hinders people from receiving correction. To succeed, each man must deal with pride in his or her life. It is pride that makes some one never turn back to say, why did I fail? What did I do wrong the first or last time? How can I improve what I am doing?

Poverty and shame cannot be guests to every one. They select their friends and host and hosts. They go to people who keep doing the same things over and over again without ever seeking or learning how to improve. They are attracted.

Since they are guests of proud people, they also leave when you change your ways and begin to get or take corrections. As you learn and take correction, poverty and shame begin to feel uncomfortable around you. They know they are no longer wanted and begin to leave. You always lose the opposite of what you attract. If your life style attracts poverty and shame, riches and honour stay away from you. But if your lifestyle begins to attract riches and honour, poverty and shame simply walk away from you.

No one is born poor! Poverty only comes to people who attract it. What are you attracting?

HE WHO REWARDS REBUKE WILL BE HONOURED Rebuke from mistakes or failure is your opportunity to move on to success, riches and honoure. Do not disdain correction or rebukes. OPPORTUNITY + INITIAL RESPONSE + FAILURE +HUMILITY +CORRECTION= RICHES AND HONOUR It is not about accomplishing but what you are accomplishing

LOVE DISCIPLINES
Proverbs 13: 24
He who spares his rod hates his son, But he who loves him disciplines him properly.
Discipline is what forms the character of a child. No parent ever thinks he hates his son or child. We equate love with taking care of children, - feed them, clothe them, send to school and make them feel loved and happy. So, if you want children to feel loved and happy all the time, we would never want to make them cry or feel pain. That is one reason parents spare the rod. Parents may also choose to not disturb themselves because of children. They do not want the pains of disciplining children. That is a second reason they may spare the rod. Whatever te reason, any idea of love that says No to a necessary pain today, only postpones an evil day. It is not love to make a child happy and leave him sad and confused the rest of his life. It is better that the child is sad today and rejoices the rest of his life. The end of a matter is better that the beginning. so, parental love that excludes discipline is hatred because the parents have not considered properly what the end of that child would be. True parental love involves prompt discipline of the child. That also means using the rod to give the child corrective pain when it is necessary.

The following must be noted in raising a child:
1. Children would not do the right just because you told them to. They are often two distracted to focus on instructions.
2. Using only gifts to motivate children to do the right thing makes them reward-dependent. People should love to do right.
3. Using pain to restrain them all the time may make them pain resistant. However, it also helps to teach them that life spanks when any one misbehaves. All three techniques must be employed: words, gifts and pain.

BACKSLIDERS ARE SELF EMPLOYED
Proverbs 14:14
The back slider in heart will be filled with his own ways; but good man will be satisfied.

The back slider is a good man who turned evil, a man who withdrew from following the ways of God to following his own way. Every way a man follows has consequences. You cannot choose a way and then refuse where it leads. Wiseman choose ways because of destination. Fools choose ways because of how they feel.

BACKSLIDERS ARE SPIRITUALLY SELF EMPLOYED
They do their own things and follow their own ways. So, eat what they get. They will be filled with (the fruit of) their ways. Your methods (ways) cannot produce beyond what you know. So, if you are going to follow your own ways, better be sure they will give you what you truly desire. Your ways produce for you. WHATEVER A MAN IS FILLED WITH IS THE FRUIT OF THE WAY HE IS FOLLOWING. THE RESULT YOU ARE GETTING IS FROM THE WAY YOU ARE FOLLOWING. IF YOU CHANGE YOUR WAY, YOU GET NEW DIFFERENT RESULTS. IF YOU CONTINUE IN THE WAY YOU ARE GOING, YOU CANNOT HOPE ANYTHING different. THE WAY IS THE RESULT.
A GOOD MAN !

Why will a good man be saqtisfied from above? The way he follows is above. He is a representative of above. So, he will be satisfied from ABOVE. You are paid from where you make input. Following the ways of God is being employed by God. Following your own way is being selfemployed. A good man is paid from above above all; but a backslider pays himself because he works fort himself testing his own ways.

The way is the result
The thought is the word and
The feeling is the action.


WHO YOU ARE IS THE REASON FOR WHAT YOU GET.
Proverbs 14: 18
The simple inherit folly; but the prudent are crowned with knowledge.

A. who you are is the reason for what you get. It is not the experiences of a man that make hin. Rather, every man is the author of his experiences or destiny. Folly is like a natural endowment to the simple. It just looks they cannot be cured of it because it is inherited. Just note that the simple comes before what he inherits. It is being simple that made him inherit folly. Similarly, the verse tells that the prudent are crowned with knowledge. Note that the prudent comes before the crowning. So, people are not prudent because they are crowned with knowledge. Rather a man is crowned with knowledge because he is prudent. it also means that a man becomes rich before he gets money. Money does not make any rich. It is the rich that makes money. They simply translate what they are already into cash. Lack of money does not make people poor. It is poverty that makes people lack money. It is the poor that lack money. The poverty of the poor is their destruction.

B. Changing your experiences depends on changing who you are. If the simple wants to be crowned with knowledge, he must become prudent. What you are is primary. What you get is secondary. Who are comes before what you have or get. LETS us MAKE man in our image ! and let them HAVE dominion. The reason for what you have is who you are.

C. MEN CAN BE CHANGED OR TRANSFORMED.
Is the making of a man a fixed thing? Can a man change? Can the leopard change it s colour? Men think they are helpless because that is how they are made. I cannot help it; that is the way I am made. That is only an excuse. MEN ARE MADE OR REMADE (CHANGE) IN THEIR MIND. That is why Romans 12:2 says, be transformed (changed) by the renewing of your mind. Men are made by the programming of their minds. It is a mans thoughts or beliefs that make him simple or prudent. No man is enslaved to who he is rather man change who they are by changing how they think.

STEPS TO PERSONAL CHANGE
1. Renew your remind. Update your thoughts
2. Renew your thought pattern. AS A MAN THINK, so is his
3. Change your Association, A companion of wise-men shall be wise!

Birth gives us physiology. But acquired philosophy gave our nature and experiences.

Proverbs 14:19
The evil will bow before the good. And the wicked at the gates of the righteous.

Every assertion of the word of God is true, but we do not always see the manifestation. Often, we see that opposite happening. It just seems that, often, the good bows before the evil and the righteous at the gates of the wicked. Why is it so? Gods word must be worked. The will of God is not established atomically the word of God must be worked to establish it.

HOW TO ESTABLISH GODS WORD.
1. Know what God says. Ignorance of Gods word makes accept the statusquo or just anything as Gods will.
2. Insist on what God says. If righteous bows at the gates of the wicked, God will not object. Anything you tolerate, God will not change it. However, anything you are not ready to tolerate, God will help you to eliminate. If Mordecai had agreed to bow to Haman, nothing would leave change in Shushan.
3. Do not be afraid of conflict opposition or persecution. Those who fear these things can never establish Gods word. the apostle did not fear the threat of the Jewish rulers. They were ready to clash with them. Unless there are clashes, the things God has promised, cannot be delivered.

If you want to see miracles, divine intervention, promotion or abundance; if you want to see victories and triumphs, refuse to bow before the evil or at the gates of the wicked.

Do not bow before sickness
Do not bow before poverty and lack
Do not bow before the proud and arrogant
Do not bow before sickness.

4. Raise a positive standard against a negative force. Use the desirable to
suppress the undesired.

DIVINE VIGILANCE /SURVEILLANCE
Proverbs 15:3The Eyes of the Lord are in every place; keeping watch on the evil and the good.

Lesson (1) The Lord has eyes and sees. If He gave us eyes to see, then He sees even better. Idols have eyes but cannot see with them.

Lesson (2) The Eyes of the Lord are in Every place: this means that no place is hidden from His eyes. Psalms 139 shows that it is impossible to hide from the presence of the Lord. Hebrews 4:13 shows that all things are naked and bare before Him with whom we have to deal -. He sees everyone, every one everywhere, every time. He sees even the future! God does not need any one to report any matter to Him. He sees everything. He is the seer! Those who are called seers (like Samuel in the Bible 1 Samuel 9:) actually depend on His sight. God shows them a bit of what He sees.

He can show prophet Ahijah what Jeroboams wife has done
He can show Elijah where king Ahab is (1kings 11)
He can show Elijah what the king of Syria is planning (2 kings 6)
He can show Elisha what Gehazi has done (2kings 5)
He can show Ananias where Saul of Tarsus is staying (Act 9)
He can reveal Peter to Cornelius (Acts 10).
He opened up the woman of Samaria to Jesus (John 4)

With The Lord, blindness is not excuse for ignorance! He is in the eyes of those who stand before Him. They see through His eyes. This is the root of the spirit of revelation. The end time church will be a seeing church.

Lesson 3. The Lord keeps watch on the evil and the good. Nothing is out of hand in the universe. Evil cannot go unpunished and the good cannot go unrewarded. Evil cannot triumph over the good but will certainly bow to it. Ezekiel 47:35 says the name of that city (the end-time church) shall be called the Lord is there. Where the Lord is, nothing can be hidden and there can be no deception. Today: you will not be deceived or stumble blindly into evil. The eyes of the Lord will see for you.

Proverbs 15:8 THE SACRIFICE OF THE WICKED
Who is the wicked?
As far as God is concerned, one is either righteous or wicked, there is no middle ground! As there are two kinds of righteousness, there are two kinds of wicked people. The first category is those who practice wickedness. The second category of the wicked are those who have rejected Gods gift of righteousness and so are void of righteousness. In that sense, every un believer is a wicked person. They reject love, grace and mercy. They trample underfoot the sacrifice of Gods son and reject so great a salvation from God.

Both the one that practices wickedness and the one who rejects the grace of God, (even if he is very moral) are termed wicked in the sight of God.
God abhors the sacrifice of the wicked because

1. They are using their sacrifice as a cover-up. Rather than do what is right, they try to bribe God with their sacrifices. They believe somehow, that their sacrifice will substitute for their wickedness.

2. They have rejected the sacrifice of God. How then can they bring sacrifice to God? It is arrogance to rejects Gods gift and then bring him a gift that is presuming that you are richer than God and that he needs you more than you need him.

3. They are ignorant of what constitutes real sacrifice before God. The sacrifices of the Lord are a contrite spirit and a broken heart. He does not despise those. The privilege of the upright The upright is not just a doer of right things but one who has a right standing with, and before God. The one who depends on Gods mercy and fear him. (Psalm 33:18) God delights in the cry of the upright, not in his offerings (1 Samuel 15:1) Lord, let my strength be in dependence on you.

Proverbs 15:9 THE WAY OF THE WICKED
Every destination has a way leading to it. There is the wicked way and the righteous way in the sight of God, the way to the destination is as important as the destination. The wicked minds only about the destination and cares less about the way to his goal or destination. If he wants money (a good goal), he can cheat, steal, or kill to get it. What is important to him is getting what he wants- not what he does to get what he wants. On the other hand, the righteous wants to get his goal by doing only what is right in the sight of God. The righteous man is mindful of the way that leads to the destination. He cares more about the way (the means) than about the destination (the end). The way forfeits the end if the means is not right.

For the wicked, the end justifies the means. For the righteous, the mean justifies the end. The wicked chooses his own way. He does not follow the way appointed by God (Romans 10:1-4)
1. The way of the wicked disregards God or His pleasure
2. The way of the wicked disregards principles and procedures
3. The way of the wicked is self centered
4. The way of the wicked is haste
5. The way of the wicked is disregards the good of other men
6. The way of the wicked disregards proper values

The wicked will do anything from mean to bizarre to get what he wants. It is the way of the wicked that contaminates the sacrifice of the wicked. The way of the wicked and the sacrifice of the wicked are both abomination to the Lord.
The one the Lord loves
The Lord loves the one who follows righteousness- the way of the word of
God. It also means we hate the ones which follow wickedness (psalms
45:7) If the Lord loves those who follow righteousness, it means God goes
after him like a man in love with a woman.
I will follow the righteous way today and every day. God help me!

GOD: FAR FROM THE WICKED
Proverbs 15 29 the Lord is far from the wicked but He hears the prayer of
the righteous

Although it often looks doubtful that the Lord is far from the righteous (judging from the kind of experience in psalms 73), it is truly so. The lord is far from the wicked because (1) Iniquity separates him from God (Isaiah 59:1 2); (2) They would not draw near to God (James 4:8-10). It is the wicked that make it difficult for him to see God. He runs from God whereas God is waiting to show him mercy (Isaiah 55:6,7). The distance between the Lord and the wicked is not an irreducible one. The wicked can draw closer eventually even close up the gap. Without repentance and cleansing, the wicked cannot reach the Lord whether by his prayers or sacrifices. The Lord being far from the wicked also mean that the Lord does not hear His prayers.

If the Lord does not hear the prayers of the wicked how do they survive and how are they sustainable? They draw from the goodness of the Lord. The Lord favours them from His goodness (Mathew 5:45)! They also enjoy the fruit of the prayers and supplication of the righteous. When the Righteous pray down the blessing of the Lord, the wicked also share in the blessing (1 Timothy 2:1-4). Part of the reason the wicked is alive is because God hears the prayers of the righteous. Since God hears (and answers) the prayers of the righteous, which stems from his desires, it means that the righteous is in authority indirectly. If God hears and answers the prayers of the righteous, it means that He performs the desires of the righteous, so, the righteous can rule the earth through his prayers. He tells God what he wants done on earth, according to the will of God, and God does it in response to his prayers.

GOOD REPORT OF THE WORD: KEY TO HEALTH
THE LIGHT AND THE GOOD REPORT OF THE WORD
Proverbs 15: 30 The light of the eyes rejoices the heart, and a good report
makes the bones healthy

The lamp of the body is the eye (Mathew 6.22). This is evident because when you close your eyes in the day, light goes off for the body. What, then, is the light of the eyes? The key to identifying The light of the eyes, is in what it does. It rejoices the heart! Read psalms 36:9; 119:111, 105, 162 and Jeremiah 15:16. The word of God (truth breaking forth from it) rejoices the heart and gives medicine and health to the body. The light of the eyes rejoices the heart, and the rejoicing of the heart strengthens The body. Revealed truth rejoices the heart because it enlightens the eyes. Good report strengthens and fattens the bones.

THE POWER OF A GOOD REPORT
What is a good report? It is good news. It is favourable news. The ultimate good report is the gospel of salvation through Jesus Christ. The ten spies who went with Joshua and Caleb brought an evil report concerning the Promised Land. The people lost their strength when they heard and believed the evil report. A Good report is the announcement of what God has already done and finished for us. Salvation is finished. Healing is finished. Heaven is finished. Deliverance is finished. Provisions are already settled. e.tc. The declaration of the finished work is the key to the healing of the church. That is what will heal the bones of the church and release her from every cripple condition. Gods promises are good reports. In the Bible, the lame and crippled were healed through the power of the good report. They were always told to stand on their feet because the work has been finished. When good news comes, the people move knowing that obstacles have been removed, and by moving they are healed.

THE WISDOM OF HEARING THE REBUKE OF THE WISE
Proverbs 15: 31 The ear that hears the rebuke of life will abide among
the wise

Commands come from those who rule, instruction come from those who know. Everyone has opportunity to be among the wise. The wise are not people without mistakes - but people who made mistakes but learnt from the rebuke of life. No one ever rebukes someone who did or does everything right. When people are rebuked it is because they fumbled and need opportunity to do the right things and do them the right way.

Those who hear the rebuke of life do not defend or justify their actions. They take corrections. The first time prophet Samuel rebuked king Saul, for offering sacrifice he was defensive and tried to explain his action rather than admit wrong and ask forgiveness (1Samuel 13:1-14). The second time that Samuel rebuke Saul for disregarding the word of God concerning Amalek, he was also defensive. (1 Samuel 15:1-23) he always had an excuse for wrong doing.

That was how he lost the opportunity to be among the wise. The was how he lost the opportunity to be numbered among the wise. Those who hear rebuke of life do not get angry or fight back when they are rebuked. King Jeroboam resisted the prophet who brought the rebuke of life to his kingdom (1 kings 13: 1- 6).

King David, perhaps, did a worse thing than the kings named above but heard the rebuke from the mouth of prophet Nathan (2 Samuel 12:1-15). The king humbled himself and repented at the rebuke of Nathan. That was how king David was numbered among the wise.

Sometimes the rebuke of life come to us through the pains we suffer for wrong doing; and we are expected to learn great lessons from those pains rather than get bitter and hardened. I pray that you will abide among the wise. You were born to dwell with and abide among the wise. Where you end up will be determine by your response to the rebuke of life.

THE INSTRUCTION OF THE WORD
Proverbs 15:32 He who disdains instructions despises his own soul, but he
who heeds rebuke gets understanding.

There are four major divisions of the word of God: (1) Assertions (2) promises (3) Rebukes /corrections (4) commands and instructions. Assertions bring light. Promises bring peace and hope. Rebuke brings deliverance from wrong doing. Commands and instructions bring direction for successful living. Instructions are not commands but guides for safety and success. Proverbs 4:13 reveals the value of instruction. It is your life.

Your life and future is tied to obedience or disobedience to instructions. Success or failure in life depends on what you do with instructions - instruction of your creator, your teacher, or coach or trainer, your employer, your leader, your doctor, lawyer, consultant, pastor, or the instruction of a manufacturer or of some other authority.

To disdain instruction is to view it with scorn or contempt. To disdain a thing means to look down on it. Anyone who disdains instructions despises his own soul. Whatever you are doing with instruction is exactly what you are doing with your own soul. The reason for failure in any endeavour is disregarded of instruction.

King Saul hurt himself badly by refusing to give heed to prophet Samuels instructions. It cost him his throne and also his life. Adam lost his life because he disregarded the instruction of His creator. He plunged himself and all humanity into evil. Disdain for instruction is disdain for authority. Instructions come from authorities - those who know enough to guide you.

People despise instruction because
1. They think it does not matter
2. They think they know what to do
3. They think it delays or slows them down. Not for their good.
4. They think they can get around / avoid them
5. They do not trust the instructor

If you disdain instruction, you are not hurting the instructor by your own soul. You will be your own judge!

THE FEAR OF GOD AND HUMILITY: THE FOUNDATION OF WISDOM AND HONOUR
Proverbs 15 : 33 The fear of the Lord is the instruction of wisdom; and before honour comes humility

To fear God is the basics instruction of wisdom. But by the standards of the world, wisdom is intelligence ability to speak, answer questions or act intelligently, scarcely will the world see a person who fears God and say he is wise. They think that having the fear of God is makes someone slow and naïve. But the prime pursuit of the fear of God accord with he teaching of wisdom that honour comes after humility. If you humble yourself under the mighty hand of God, He exalts you in due season (1 peter 5:6; James 4:7).

Humility is synonymous with the fear of God. There is no such thing as a humble man who does not fear God or one who fears God and is not humble. To seek honour power or wealth - Without humility (the fear of God) is like attempting to build a skyscrapper without first laying a foundation. The fear of God (humility) is the foundation for honour in life. The fear of God is the beginning (foundation) of wisdom. When you lay humility as foundation, God builds honour on it for you. Humility is what you give; honour is what you receive. Humility (the fear reverence of God) is honouring God.

Blessing / promotion is God honouring you. (Read Mathew 6:25-33).
Reasons to fear God and humble your self before Him.
1. He is your creator
2. He is the creator and Owner of the Earth and everything in it.
3. He is the sustainer of your life
4. He is the controller of the destiny of all men.
Those who fear God should expect to be honoured. If you humble yourself daily before God, you will be exalted daily. (Luke 14:11).
